Today we look at a message quite simply called protect the atmosphere positioned to be a safe place.
We are in Klaush Chapter 4 of the universe too.
Continue earnestly in prayer, being vigilant in it with thanksgiving.
Meanwhile praying also for us that God would open to us a door for the word
to speak a mystery of Christ, which I am also in chains.
That I may make it manifest as I ought to speak.
Walk in wisdom toward those who are outside redeeming the time.
And here's our key verse for today.
Let your speech always be with grace, season with salt, that you may know how you ought to answer each one.
This is where God for the people of God.
Amen.
They got at his blessing to the reading of his word.
You may be seated.
I don't think that's going to work.
There's not much in that signal, no matter how you look at it here.
When Christine and I met, we were going over some old emails yesterday talking about old times and the different ways we've changed and grown and what we wrote back and forth to each other.
It was kind of like going down memory lane.
And some of the story that we recalled is not the story that actually happened.
Our memory only remembers certain things and not in a certain right way or order.
And I was surprised by that.
And I was amazed, but there was one thing that I noticed.
And that was, as we talked back and forth, I knew this was different.
than any other relationship had been in.
In my life it felt like I had come home for the first time.
And I remember saying that several times back then.
This relationship when it began redefined the word home for me.
Now I think people have different presences and you can tell pretty quickly what kind of person they are if you feel safe around them or not.
Around some people, you know, you feel like you can breathe, laugh, relax, and you can just be honest back and forth.
You know what I'm talking about?
I don't know how this works, but sometimes when I go to the hospital to visit folks, we're laughing the whole time.
And we're just having a great time in God.
And then the other time that's strictly serious, get it done and get out of there, type of thing, because it's a very different situation.
And I don't know why that is.
I'm the same guy.
But it's just a different atmosphere at times.
And if you know what I mean.
But what I think is, if you're comfortable enough to share laughter with someone, you're comfortable enough to feel safe with them.
And there are some people, I don't know what it is, but you tighten up the moment your heart, you hear them speak or you're around and you just go, man, I just can't wait to be, I just feel claustrophobic and you could be in a big room, you know?
Their tone can be sharp, maybe it's their criticism they do or whatever it is, but there's tension.
And it's hard to explain how quickly that can be picked up on.
In the past, I walked away from many toxic relationships before they got started because I didn't feel safe.
And with Christine, that was never an unsafe place.
And that has always been home.
And that's important.
And I bring that up to your attention because a safe and healthy relationship reminds me of a church that's healthy and positioned to grow together.
It's where you feel connected.
You don't feel like claustrophobic when you walk in the door.
I've been to churches like that.
Maybe you have before in the past, you go, I'm uncomfortable immediately.
And I've felt that.
I've been to many worship services and one of them is down in Florida and every time I went they had this EOR about this big sitting on this stage.
So you know if you got EOR on the stage, I know it was near Disney but had nothing to do with Disney.
On the stage you know there's something different about the church.
As a matter of fact,
One church I was passionate, I ended up putting a little bitty one under the communion table and people wouldn't notice it but it was there.
If it's the same reason that church had it.
The pastor said that Eor was there to remind us that we all need rescuing because on a blustery day, if you remember the story, Eor got swept up in the storm and was floating down the river on his back and there's Pooh Bear up on our bridge looking at him.
who bear looks and says, hello Eor, and Eor says, poo, if you're not too busy, I could stand a little rescuing.
And so, of course, in the story, they rescue Eor, right?
You remember that?
And so a church should be a place like that where I could stand a little rescuing.
People say, yeah, me too.
Let's help each other find hope and healing, because we all need grace in Jesus to save us.
That pastor said, our church is a hospital with people in different levels of triage and healing, but we will always need the healing grace of Jesus.
I felt safe there when I was in Florida, and I went as often as I could, and so thankful for the heart of the pastor that changed the culture of the church there.
So when we come to church, you know, there's no Eor,
But we expect something.
We don't just come to go and sit down.
We come with the expectation of one thing or another, a hope to see folks we know, to connect.
But when we walk in, we experience what's called atmosphere.
There's a presence, if you will, or a culture that you understand that's different than not inside the church.
And each church has its own atmosphere.
When a church starts to grow, it can express underlying tones unseen in the atmosphere if those aren't addressed ahead of time.
The kindness at the door and inside must never become unsafe in the culture of the church.
It should always be there and not change.
Now let me say this, a safe church
place of feels like home doesn't mean it's soft okay doesn't mean oh you say no it's no worry about it we don't worry you don't kind of thing we are to be grace filled but also true centered people can grow and confess without being shamed without being crushed and they can feel the healing of God without being watched
And they can serve without feeling used and belong without being labeled.
That's safe.
That's what people look for.
We have that here.
I think you know that.
And I think the word protect is the wrong word, but that's the word I wrote to protect that, but more so to ensure that it remains.
And then increase it.
actually to increase the openness and safety and to be intentional about being a safe church throughout the changes of our lives and the church's life.
And that starts with leadership, not just me, but all the leadership in the church and people who serve and work.
And as we position for growth, as the things change and people start coming to our region and start checking our church out,
We have to acknowledge that there is an atmosphere in everything you go to including here.
Once we acknowledge it, we can be more intentional about making sure that it's expressed well.
And I'll tell you what, atmospheres are built carefully.
You can't assume it because once you start assuming it, one can't get it and it's no longer what it was.
So you can't do that.
So how do we focus
our atmosphere, to be an atmosphere that people want to be a part of who've never been here.
In Ephesians chapter 4, it gives us a little bit of a clue.
It says, let no corrupt word proceed out of your mouth, but what is good for necessary edification, that it may impart grace to the heroes.
I like that verse.
It's words are kind of like construction tools.
In Paducah, if you've seen it, they're getting ready to put in a vast pro shop.
But, you know, they wanted to build it in a location where other buildings already were.
Kind of hard unless you're going to tear out inside walls and do everything and then kick out some back walls and then make this thing what it needs to be.
with what's there so what's the first thing they did as soon as the announcement was made y'all remember a couple weeks ago they tore it all down construction sometimes starts with the demolishing what doesn't work and getting a firm foundation and new foundation for something that's going to be there and construction in our words needs to with grace help and heal and guide not
Destroy but prepare people and ourselves through the work God wants to do and sometimes he has to change the way we think has to tear down strongholds and things like that The truth about our words is that speech is rarely neutral It's either building or tearing down and the only kind of tearing down our words need to do is
are the kind where we're graciously helping someone find a better way to approach life.
Not to tell them they're wrong or they don't know what they're doing, but rather to lead by example and guide by grace.
So if you want to know what a atmosphere of a church is, you want to know whether it's this one or another, it's kind of simple how to do.
It just leads to people talking afterward or beforehand in the parking lot.
You'll hear it.
And you'll see if they're talking about leadership, visitors, if they're talking about other churches, about people who are struggling, people who are, you know, different kind of ministries or whatever the conversations are that aren't going on during the one hour, we're in worship.
What kind of conversations do we have?
It's a conversation of saying this is a need and we're looking for solutions or
Is it more the opposite of, here's what people are doing and how can we, you know, make sure it doesn't poison every day.
So those conversations tell you the atmosphere and the culture that's in the church by being on the outside listening to the conversations.
And it's amazing to me to see when a church focused on growth isn't talking about people, it's talking about ministry.
The focus changes.
It's not about, oh, did you see what they were in church today?
Can't believe that.
It's more like, hey, we got some people around here.
We want to help.
What do you want to do?
What can we do?
What can we do that we're really good at?
And people talking about that privately or in groups after or before service.
When that happens, your church is positioned for growth and it's got an atmosphere of growth because it's an atmosphere of ministry and helping.
And I know a lot of y'all talk about like,
What can we do for family kitchen food pantry?
How can we help?
What can we do to help the people around us?
And that's what I'm talking about.
That's a ministry of growth and care.
And sometimes a church doesn't do that.
But we've been very good at that and we continue to be.
And I'm so thankful for that.
But I want to share that with you because we need to be intentional about that and continue to do what we do well even better.
because the atmosphere that we experience isn't created by sermons alone.
They're created by the habits that we generate or that we live by.
It's interesting to look at all the old emails and the development of relationship and different ministries we've been a part of over the years and other outside relationships and influences and to see how
our lives habits have been changed by each of those things.
Whether it's a bad relationship on the outside of the family or negativity that's elsewhere and then we do things and we forget we've placed this new thing in order in our lives realizing that it was a response to something that's no longer needed, but we keep it there.
We have to create good habits and know why we created them.
Paul says our words must impart grace.
Grace isn't just preached.
It's transmitted by relationships.
In the message, the verse I read to you out of Ephesians says, watch the way you talk, say only what helps considering each word a gift.
Your words can be gifts of life and healing.
And they are in the right context to the right person.
And sometimes we can increase and find ways to do that more often.
There's something about loving others that we sometimes miss, especially when we have good intent, but the wrong way to go about doing it.
Because sometimes we're all focused on the truth,
or we're focused on love and not both, but truth without love actually wounds someone.
And love without truth weakens someone.
In Ephesians 4 verse 15 it says, we need to speak the truth in love.
Truth and love.
We talked about it in previous sermon a little bit about that, but I want to go a little further with it.
The truth without love becomes harshness.
and love without truth becomes compromise.
You don't want harshness and you don't want compromise.
A safe church does not celebrate sin.
It doesn't.
And it refuses to also crush sinners.
So we're not saying, oh, it's okay.
You go ahead and sin.
God's got bigger grace in your sin.
And we don't go the other extreme and go,
You got to stop doing that.
If you don't stop doing that, you know, we don't know what we're going to do with you.
Because we can walk either extreme.
It's not good.
We don't water down the necessity of being holy.
But at the same time, we don't weaponize holiness either by saying, you're not holy.
You're not doing the right thing.
You need to measure up.
And so those kind of statements you've maybe seen, I can't believe they're here.
The only person needs to say that is a person walking through that I can't believe I'm here and that ceiling didn't fall down type thing.
They're the only persons I can't believe I'm here.
Not someone else can't believe they're here.
What are they doing here?
You know, that statement weaponizes holiness and makes it into
a place where we judge someone for their character rather than saying, thank God they're here now Jesus can do something.
Maybe they're ready.
What can I do to help?
What can I do to be a part of that redeeming value of Jesus Christ in their life?
And if you ask me, that's a better question than what are they doing here?
Jesus was full of grace and truth.
It tells us that in the first chapter of John.
But truth without love makes people crawl inside and hide.
I was thinking about, I don't know what prompted my dad to say this, but I remember in high school I was very angry at what he said, and I wrote it down.
But I don't remember what I did to make him angry.
So I'm just justifying my anger at what he said, not thinking about what I did to make him say it.
If you know what I mean by one of those situations?
So, my dad had said to me something, I don't know what I said, but it was probably pretty bad.
Or something I had done that was pretty bad, it's alright, you wanna pay rent, go ahead.
You can pay rent and that'll be just fine.
You got a job now it's time to pay rent.
I'm not gonna put you up for free.
And I was mad.
I went to work road and known saying, my dad just told me I'm going to have to start paying room and board.
And I'm mad.
And I don't like it.
And maybe I'm not thinking clearly, but I don't like it.
That were my words were.
That was my words.
I had written down at work that day about that situation.
I don't remember though my heart ain't that funny.
But my dad said that and I took it
as harsh.
You know, if you're not going to do what I say, you're going to have the consequences.
Rather than saying, let me show you a better way, son.
Let me show you how to handle this.
Let me teach you how to respond to people.
Instead, he just brought the hammer.
And some people will like that, unfortunately.
So truth without love makes people hide.
And I hid.
from my dad's anger because I didn't like it.
And I'd do anything I could to make sure it didn't show up because it was bad.
It was nonstop bad.
And so if he was just going to be truth without love, I was going to make sure he didn't show me any of it.
I hid away from him a lot.
And love without truth is shallow at the best.
That was my mother.
She was the other side.
So I got truth from dad and love from mom, and I'm thinking, why can't they both get together on this thing?
And I get some of both and, but my mom would always go, it's all right, son, it'll be okay.
I could be doing some of the stupidest things in the world, making her upset.
This is probably a nightmare situation for a church, but at the time I didn't think about it.
I accidentally peeled a small piece, we're in the parsley now.
in my bedroom of the wallpaper.
I lived in a bedroom with pink flowers on a wallpaper.
And I accidentally bumped the wall and I saw under it a nice pretty coral color.
So I proceeded to pull off the wallpaper off the wall that they had paper before we moved in.
And my mother looks and there's strips of wallpaper still on hanging.
And she goes, what did you do?
I said,
I like that color better.
My mother was so incensed, she cried, but she never punished me.
She just said, you can't do that.
So she was passive aggressive.
And you know what she did?
She helped me.
She said, let's finish feeling this wallpaper.
And I'm going, oh, mom, I messed up.
You don't know.
And so you know how she punished me?
First thing she did, she took some ugly pink and painted an entire wall pink, which is the color I don't like.
And then we would go out camping with the church
And she'd tell everybody what I did.
And I go, Mom, don't tell anybody.
She says, I already did.
I go, I'm getting out of here.
But she never corrected me.
She just said, it'll be all right, son.
But then she'd tell everybody.
So you need some, what do you call some truth in there?
She could have said something along the lines of, son, I love you, but this one's going to cost you.
Because you need to know you have consequences to your action.
I'm glad she didn't tell that.
Or maybe she did, but he never spoke a word to me about it.
He might have said, nice walls, huh?
That's about it.
But you know, that's kind of what's happened.
So truth wrapped in love invites a healing moment.
And if you don't have those healing moments, you never know what it's like to be broken and
healed at the same time.
That kind of invitation feels safe.
That's what the church is supposed to be about.
We're all broken in need of grace.
There's not one less sinful or more sinful.
We are all under sin.
Sin is sin.
In God's eyes, no matter what it is, it's the same level of ungodliness.
There's not extremes of ungodliness.
There's either godly or not.
And God is quite clear.
There is no level of ungodliness.
And so when we think about that, and when you think about that, it's a lot harder to look at someone and go, I can't believe you did that unless you say, well, I can't believe I did this at the same time.
Can't believe you did that, but I can believe that I might have done that when I was younger.
Those kind of conversations can actually open up people.
to feel safe.
The reason why is because people who sin that we know about and understand and the reputation precedes them, they need forgiven.
Bottom line, they need forgiven and they need to know they are.
They need to know that they can change and they're not condemned to that life for eternity or for the rest of this life.
They need to know that grace is bigger than what they did, that the cross went deeper.
Forgiveness keeps the house open to new people, to the people who are in there, and it keeps the relationship safe.
Ephesians 4.32 says, forgive as Christ forgave.
Offences and misunderstandings are going to happen.
We aren't going to get out of this world without them.
The question is whether we're going to forgive quickly and deeply.
as Christ did.
A safe place doesn't mean that there's nothing that's painful there or that nothing hurts.
It means there's a healing culture for all wounds.
We can be broken and loved.
That's when you feel safe.
And that's not always a culture in many places in this world.
And when we feel safe, it creates staying power.
When you feel welcomed and wanted and loved and accepted, you want to be there.
Colossians chapter three, verses 12 through 15 says in part, put on tender mercies, kindness, humility, meekness, long suffering, forgiveness, and above all, love.
People grow where they feel safe enough to be real.
where they can be themselves and not go, here I am.
Is that okay?
Because once you feel like you can't be you, you don't feel safe.
When compassion and humility become a normal part of a culture or atmosphere, people will stop performing, putting on masks and start being transformed by grace.
because there's no need to pretend, or false pretense, people can be who they are.
A reconciled church becomes a reconciliation witness in St. Corinthians chapter 5, verses 18 and 19.
God gave us the ministry of reconciliation.
The safe church isn't just comfortable, it's credible to the work of God.
God is at work in the church here.
We see that, we see answers to prayer, we see miracles, we see God doing things and it gives us confidence to bring more to the throne, to share more, to love more, to do more.
When the atmosphere is there and it's protected and cherished unity in the church is visible to other people, they see how the people love each other.
They see that they forgive each other quickly.
that it's a normal part of their culture.
It's not something you have to go, well, I don't know if I should or shouldn't.
We understand this is what we do because we belong to Jesus.
And humility in a church is attractive.
It's beautiful.
We're here because of grace.
Not we're here because we belong to God and we're privileged.
When humility comes grace that is talked about becomes believable and becomes accessible See the gospel isn't just a message It becomes an ecosystem And the guiding force is grace Our stories That we tell are not about what other people should be doing or fixing in their lives
They're about what God redeemed us from and saved us to do and what we're trying to do to help others.
That's the story of a healthy church and the people in it.
We'll talk about whether people ought to be doing or changing.
We talk about what God did for us when he's doing it through us.
That's powerful because there's a lot of people who need to hear that we're about doing what God asks us to do, not about trying to get other people to fix themselves.
We hear to love.
And so I suggest that we use the safe filter when we share or speak to others.
In other words, before you speak, run it through safe.
And safe is an acrostic for the simple way of understanding what our speech needs to be seasoned with.
As it says on here, season with salt and always with grace, this helps.
Yes, it's got to be scriptural.
It's gotta be accurate.
Don't twist it to mean something else.
It has to be faith building and it has to be edifying.
If it doesn't pass that criteria, it's probably not worth saying and it's probably not safe.
If it fails that criteria, don't say it.
This isn't censorship either.
This is just common sense discipleship and loving people.
So how do we do this?
How do we keep our atmosphere safe?
The one thing we first do is we look for ways to share our hope with others, to know what it is.
And when you hear somebody gossip about somebody say, let's not talk about them, let's talk to them so we can do to help.
That would be an interesting thing.
You see what she's wearing over here?
You know, I think we got to go talk there and see if she's got something we can help her with her wardrobe.
that we can come alongside her and help her so that she doesn't feel embarrassed.
You know, that's where you change gossip and to grace.
And if we forgive quickly, we need to set the example and show the example that we've set by offering it to the person in a way that's real.
And then make room for new people, even if it's next to you in your pew.
When someone new comes and say, would you sit with me?
Because
If they've never been here before, I don't know where to go.
They don't know who to sit with.
They
You practice and live out the method of 4-H. You know, 4-H is right?
No, no, it's not the club.
4-H needs to be redefined, and that is it.
We are all about help, hope, healing, and harvesting.
Help, hope, healing, and harvesting.
We have a 4-H in our lives and in the church.
Can people know that?
They want to be a part of it.
And that's one way, for sure, we can keep ourselves a safe culture that God wants people to see and grow in.
Would you pray with me?
Lord, I ask you to help our church be an everlasting refuge where people can grow without being shamed, where they can confess without being crushed and healed without being watched.
Guard our words, purify our tone,
If there is any spirit of gossip, criticism, or division, break it now.
Let the harmony of truth and love live together in this house, your house.
Make us each a safe place, convict us where we are not, that all of the glory would be yours alone.
Amen.
Let's stand for our closing hand, which would be number three eighty, the same before and the last twenty-three.